# Are Blockchain Systems the Basis Upon Which People Can Easily Interact With Distant Strangers and Collaborate at Scale?

Bitcoin (BTC) is a form of electronic cash that is referred to as cryptocurrency because it relies on cryptography. Blockchain is the technology underpinning BTC; it provides an immutable database, or public ledger, of every BTC transaction that has ever taken place. However, a blockchain has capabilities far beyond any standard database because it also includes algorithms that provide a secure mechanism for electronic collaboration that does not rely upon a central authority for the assets to be trusted [@uk_government_chief_scientific_adviser_distributed_2015]. That includes the concept of smart contracts, which is the ability of blockchains to execute autonomous scripts that can represent verifiable application logic and help automate a system’s rule set.

In my recently published paper, Socialism and the Blockchain [@huckle_socialism_2016], I find that most of the social and political narrative around BTC (and in their turn, blockchains) concentrates on a Libertarian viewpoint, which is an ideology that advocates individual freedom and minimal state intervention in people’s lives. However, I argue that blockchains can equally apply to Socialism, which is an economic theory and form of governance that advocates community ownership. Indeed, governmental institutions are beginning to examine blockchains as they recognise that some of a blockchain’s properties may have implications that extend beyond BTCs reach to economics and into social, political and humanitarian domains [@swan_blockchain:_2015].

My paper uses political theories as a means of explaining the technology. However, this may be a form of ‘coded governance’ of the type examined by Scott in How Can Cryptocurrency and Blockchain Technology Play a Role in Building Social and Solidarity Finance? [@brett_scott_how_2016], where he questions ‘techno-evangelism’. In particular, Scott looks at the dynamics of the Silicon Valley mantra: “In cryptography we trust.” He asks whether the BTC Libertarian narrative is just a form of “Techno-Colonial Solutionism”; the idea that technology, such as BTC, is an apolitical problem-solving mechanism whereby everything is either a problem already solved, or a problem to be solved by technology-driven organisations [@brett_scott_how_2016].

Is Scott correct or can technology, such as blockchains, actually offer solutions to, for example, the extreme poverty of Sub-Saharan Africa or the over-arching hyper-Capitalist models provided by the likes of Uber, which many regard as exploitative? In short, can technology be the basis for a fairer society? That question forms the basis for my research.

## References
